Supplemental data for Global emergence and population dynamics of divergent serotype 3 CC180 pneumococci 

Taj Azarian, Patrick K Mitchell, Maria Georgieva, Claudette M Thompson, Amel Ghouila, Andrew J Pollard, Anne von Gottberg, Mignon du Plessis, Martin Antonio, Brenda A Kwambana-Adams, Stuart C Clarke, Dean Everett, Jennifer Cornick, Ewa Sadowy, Waleria Hryniewicz, Anna Skoczynska, Jennifer C Moïsi, Lesley McGee, Bernard Beall, Benjamin J Metcalf, Robert F Breiman13, PL Ho, Raymond Reid15, Katherine L O’Brien, Rebecca A Gladstone, Stephen D Bentley, William P Hanage

Abstract:
Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 3 remains a significant cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, despite inclusion in the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13).  Serotype 3 increased in carriage since the implementation of PCV13 in the United States, while invasive disease rates remain unchanged.  We investigated the persistence of serotype 3 in carriage and disease, through genomic analyses of a global sample of 301 serotype 3 isolates of the Netherlands3–31 (PMEN31) clone CC180, combined with associated patient data and PCV utilization among countries of isolate collection.  We assessed phenotypic variation between dominant clades in capsule charge (zeta potential), capsular polysaccharide shedding, and susceptibility to opsonophagocytic killing, which have previously been associated with carriage duration, invasiveness, and vaccine escape.  We identify a recent shift in the CC180 population attributed to a lineage termed Clade II, which was estimated by Bayesian coalescent analysis to have first appeared in 1968 [95% HPD: 1939-1989] and increased in prevalence and effective population size thereafter.  Clade II isolates are divergent from the pre-PCV13 serotype 3 population in non-capsular antigenic composition, competence, and antibiotic susceptibility, the last resulting from the acquisition of a Tn916-like conjugative transposon.  Differences in recombination rates among clades correlated with variations in the ATP-binding subunit of Clp protease as well as amino acid substitutions in the comCDE operon.  Opsonophagocytic killing assays elucidated the low observed efficacy of PCV13 against serotype 3.  Variation in PCV13 use among sampled countries was not independently correlated with the CC180 population shift; therefore, genotypic and phenotypic differences in protein antigens and, in particular, antibiotic resistance may have contributed to the increase of Clade II.  Our analysis emphasizes the need for routine, representative sampling of isolates from disperse geographic regions, including historically under-sampled areas.  We also highlight the value of genomics in resolving antigenic and epidemiological variations within a serotype, which may have implications for future vaccine development. 

Protein Antigen Database:
ProteinAg_DB.fasta is the most recent version of the database, which I have used for two publications.  I use this database in conjunction with SRST2 (https://github.com/katholt/srst2) to identify what variant pneumococcal isolates have.  It works great for all non-PspC antigens (including variants of PspA) and “okay” with PspC.  Since they are so similar, SRST2 has a hard time making calls for PspC regardless of the settings.  The variants I included in this db are the most broadly representative of all pneumococcal strains I have come across and most distinct.  Still, I sometimes have to go to the annotated de novo assembles and manually blast some that didn’t get called. Since I was initially using antibody titer data from David Golblatt’s array, I used the variants corresponding to the assay used in Turner et al (PMID:24255996).  For pspA, the families and clades correspond to the Hollingshead et al (PMID:9767061).  The pspC variants correspond to the groups established by Iannelli et al (PMID:11891047).  
